Basics.md, before:

# Basics of floating point numbers

The integer primitives in Java are all fixed point numbers, the "binary point" 
happens to be to the right of the least significant bit. The leftmost bit is the 
sign bit, and each of the bits after that always correspond to the same power of 
two multiplied by 0 or 1.

With floating point numbers, the leftmost bit is still the sign bit. But some of 
the other bits are used for an exponent. The remaining bits represent a fixed 
point number which is multiplied by the power of two indicated by the exponent 
bits.

However many bits a particular floating point number format has, the leftmost 
bit is always for the sign, and there are multiple ways to apportion the other 
bits between the exponent and the mantissa.

After all these years of hardware and software using specific apportionments for 
the 32- and 64-bit formats, it is inadvisable to try to apportion the bits of 
these formats differently than what almost everyone does.

Therefore, the apportionments on the following table should be considered as 
suggestions for all formats other than 32- and 64-bit. The following table omits 
the sign bit column because it's always 1. It was decided long ago that 32-bit 
floating point is "single" precision, and the other formats are reckoned in 
relation to it. The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) has instructions for "single" and 
"double" precision floating point.

| JVM type | Term      | Total bits | Exponent bits | Mantissa bits |
|----------|-----------|-----------:|--------------:|--------------:|
| None     | Quarter   |          8 |             4 |             3 |
| None     | Half      |         16 |             5 |            10 |
| `float`  | Single    |         32 |             8 |            23 |
| `double` | Double    |         64 |            11 |            52 |
| None     | Quadruple |        128 |            15 |           112 |
| None     | Octuple   |        256 |            19 |           236 |

On Wikipedia, I saw the formula $4 \log_2(k) - 13$, but I have not been able to 
verify if that comes from some official source. The $k$ stands for the total 
number of bits. For single precision, there is one more exponent bit than the 
formula indicates. The formula doesn't quite work for half or quarter precision.

The total number of bits doesn't have to be a power of two, but that certainly 
simplifies the calculation of $\log_2 k$. For example, when Java first came out, 
some physical chips like the Intel 8087 provided 80-bit floating point numbers. 
The formula suggests an 80-bit floating point number ought to have roughly 
12.287712379549447 exponent bits, which in this case we round down to 12, or we 
might decide to round up to 13.

We could define "extended" formats thus:

| Term               | Total bits | Exponent bits | Mantissa bits |
|--------------------|-----------:|--------------:|--------------:|
| Extended quarter   |         10 |             4 |             5 |
| Extended half      |         20 |             5 |            14 |
| Extended single    |         40 |             8 |            31 |
| Extended double    |         80 |            12 |            67 |
| Extended quadruple |        160 |            16 |           143 |
| Extended octuple   |        320 |            20 |           299 |

The fact that bytes are made up of eight bits would seem to be the only reason 
why formats smaller than quarter precision haven't had much general use until 
fairly recently. And even quarter precision was largely forgotten outside the 
realm of embedded systems as 16-bit processors became common for personal 
computers. I will write more about the smallest formats later on in this 
document.

Note that the sign bit applies to the mantissa, not the exponent. Then it would 
seem that the exponent bits can't represent negative numbers. The lowest number 
that can be represented, given $w$ bits for the exponent, would seem to be 0 
(all exponent bits 0), and the greatest would seem to be $2^w - 1$.

But this would mean that the binary point can only be moved to the left, either 
leaving the mantissa unchanged or doubling it, quadrupling it, etc., but never 
halving, quartering, etc.

It certainly would be possible to have a separate sign bit for the exponent, but 
the format is complex enough as it is. So the concept of bias was introduced. 
The **bias** is a number, usually negative, that is added to the exponent. For 
example, if the bias is &minus;510, adding that to the unbiased exponent 1 gives 
the biased exponent &minus;509.

If $w$ is the number of exponent bits, then the bias seems to be chosen to be 
$-(2^{w - 1}) + 1$, so that an unbiased exponent of $2^{w - 1} - 1$ biases to 0. 
However, both unbiased exponents 0 and 1 bias to $-(2^{w - 1}) + 2$, as unbiased 
exponent 0 has a special meaning that will be explained later in this document. 
Then, from 1 to $2^{w - 1} - 2$, the biased exponent increases as one would 
expect. Unbiased exponent $2^w - 1$ also has a special meaning that will also be 
explained later. The following table shows typical biases:

| Precision |        Bias | Minimum biased | Maximum biased |
|-----------|------------:|---------------:|---------------:|
| Quarter   |    &minus;7 |       &minus;6 |              7 |
| Half      |   &minus;15 |      &minus;14 |             15 |
| Single    |  &minus;127 |     &minus;126 |            127 |
| Double    | &minus;1023 |    &minus;1022 |           1023 |
| Quadruple | PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |
| Octuple   | PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |

Note that the the maximum biased exponent translated to an unbiased exponent and 
then reinterpreted as a biased exponent works out to 0. For example, in quarter 
precision, the bit pattern 0 1110 001 has an unbiased exponent of 14, which 
biases to 7.

Technically, the maximum available biased exponent is one greater than is shown 
in this table, but given the special meaning of the maximum exponent, the number 
is moot.

If all the exponent bits are on, but all the mantissa bits are off, the value 
represents positive or negative infinity, according to the sign bit. But if the 
exponent bits are all on and even just one of the mantissa bits is also on, the 
value represents the special quantity Not a Number (NaN). I will elaborate NaN 
more later on in this document.

When the exponent is not the lowest nor the highest, the mantissa bits are 
understood to contain an implied leading 1. Therefore, with typical biases, the 
number 1.0 is represented with the sign bit off, all exponent bits on except the 
highest one, and all the mantissa bits off.

| Precision | Bit pattern of 1.0 in hexadecimal |
|-----------|----------------------------------:|
| Quarter   |                                38 |
| Half      |                             3C 00 |
| Single    |                       3F 80 00 00 |
| Double    |           3F F0 00 00 00 00 00 00 |
| Quadruple |                       PLACEHOLDER |
| Octuple   |                       PLACEHOLDER |

So the most significant bit of the mantissa always represents one half, the next 
most significant bit represents one quarter, and so on and so forth.

If the mantissa bits always have an implied leading 1, there's no way to 
represent 0.0. A number is said to be **normal** or **normalized** if its 
mantissa bits have an implied leading 1. But if the unbiased exponent is 0, the 
number does not have an implied leading 1 and is therefore said to be 
**subnormal**. The biased exponent for unbiased exponent 0 is the same as for 
unbiased exponent 1.

Therefore 0.0 is represented with all bits off. But if the sign bit is on and 
all other bits are off, the number is actually &minus;0.0, which is 
arithmetically equal to 0.0.

Nonzero subnormal numbers vastly complicate floating point arithmetic, 
especially when one operand is subnormal and the other one is not. In many 
cases, adding a subnormal number to a normal number results in a loss of the 
subnormal number.

Just representing a number, without necessarily trying to do arithmetic with it, 
often involves approximation. Consider for example the representation of one 
third, that is, 1.0 divided by 3. In half precision, that is represented as 
$$\frac{1 + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{16} + \frac{1}{64} + \frac{1}{256} + 
\frac{1}{1024}}{4}.$$

The bit pattern is 35 55, with sign bit 0, exponent 13 biased to &minus;2 and 
mantissa bits 0.3331 normalized to 1.3331, to represent 0.3333. In 32-bit 
floating point, we can improve that to 0.33333334 (bit pattern 3E AA AA AB) and 
in 64-bit floating point we get 0.3333333333333333 (bit pattern 3F D5 55 55 55 
55 55 55), which should be good enough for most practical purposes.

But at least in that example, improving precision is usually a simple matter of 
repeating the bit pattern. With irrational numbers like &pi; and $\sqrt 2$, 
improving precision probably requires repeating the calculation in the larger 
format.

When a number becomes too large in absolute value after one or more arithmetic 
operations for the format to represent it with any degree of approximation, it 
should overflow to positive or negative infinity. Similarly, when a number 
becomes too small in absolute value, it should vanish to &plusmn;0.0.

## More about NaN

There are two kinds of NaN: quiet NaN (qNaN) and signaling NaN (sNaN). A quiet 
NaN should not cause any sort of exception or error. A signaling NaN is supposed 
to cause some kind of exception or error, but whether or not that actually 
happens depends on several factors, some of which are hardware-dependent.

A quiet NaN has the highest explicit mantissa bit on. A signaling NaN should 
have the highest explicit mantissa bit off and obviously at least one of the 
less significant bits on (otherwise the value is an infinity, not NaN).

Beyond this, there has never been any agreement on what the other mantissa bits 
of a NaN value should represent.

"Not a number" more precisely means "not a number that can be meaningfully 
represented in this format." It is quite distinct from numbers that could be 
represented more accurately in a floating point format with more bits.

For example, the number $i$, which the number such that $i^2 = -1$, can't be 
represented meaningfully in floating point, but it can be represented in some 
kind of struct holding two floating point values (one for the real part, the 
other for the imaginary part).

FINISH WRITING

## Formats smaller than eight bits

Five-bit floating point is the smallest possible floating point number possible 
according to the rules outlined in this document so far, including the ability 
to distinguish between quiet NaNs and signaling NaNs. One sign bit, two exponent 
bits and two mantissa bits, plus an implicit leading 1 bit for the mantissa for 
normalized numbers.

However, since hardly anyone seems to care about distinguishing between quiet 
and signaling NaNs, it's possible to do 4-bit floating point: one sign bit, two 
exponent bits and a single mantissa bit. Thanks to normalization, this format 
has two effective mantissa bits for most finite values.

The bias by the usual rules then winds up being 0, which is technically 
unbiased. Normalization becomes meaningless.

It is easy to list all possible 4-bit values in this document.

| Bit pattern | Value           |
|-------------|-----------------|
| 1 00 0      | &minus;0.0      |
| 1 00 1      | &minus;0.5      |
| 1 01 0      | &minus;1.0      |
| 1 01 1      | &minus;1.5      |
| 1 10 0      | &minus;2.0      |
| 1 10 1      | &minus;3.0      |
| 1 11 0      | &minus;Infinity |
| 1 11 1      | NaN             |
| 0 00 0      | 0.0             |
| 0 00 1      | 0.5             |
| 0 01 0      | 1.0             |
| 0 01 1      | 1.5             |
| 0 10 0      | 2.0             |
| 0 10 1      | 3.0             |
| 0 11 0      | +Infinity       |
| 0 11 1      | NaN             |

Despite the apparent simplifying effect of not having to worry about 
normalization, 4-bit floating point arithmetic still has plenty of complexity. 
For example, consider that adding 3.0 to any of the five positive values should 
overflow to positive infinity in each case, not wrap around to NaN, negative 
zero or a negative value.

FINISH WRITING

## Conversions

It is quite easy to convert integers in an integer data type using two's 
complement to a wider or narrower format, e.g., to convert from a 16-bit integer 
to a 32-bit integer or the other way around.

Converting a floating point number to a wider or narrower format is subject to 
major complexity in both directions.

### Narrowing conversions

We accept that narrowing conversions are potentially lossy in the case of both 
integer types and floating point types. But in the case of integers, a loss 
occurs only when the number is farther away from 0 than the narrower format can 
accommodate.

With floating point numbers, distance from 0 alone is not enough to determine if 
the number can be converted to the narrower format precisely. The trade-off is 
that in many cases when a loss of precision occurs, the converted number is not 
too far off from the original number.

For example, 65472.0 and 65504.0 can both be represented in half precision. But 
65488.0 can't be. To take that value from a wider format, such as single 
precision, to half precision, it is necessary to either truncate the mantissa or 
round it up to the next higher available mantissa.

When a negative exponent is lower than the narrower format can represent, the 
number simply underflows to &plusmn;0.0, and when a positive exponent is higher 
than the narrower format can represent, the number simply overlows to 
&plusmn;&infin;.

### Widening conversions

Converting an integer to a wider format is just a simple matter of copying the 
sign bit to the extra bits. This works thanks to two's complement. For example, 
to convert &minus;3 in a byte to any wider integer format, we just fill the 
extra bits with more 1s.

Converting a floating point number to a wider format is rather more complicated, 
especially if the number is subnormal but not 0.0 in the original format, as it 
would not be subnormal in the target format.

In that case, the exponent needs to be converted and the highest on bit of the 
mantissa is dropped, and the remaining mantissa bits are shifted to the left 
accordingly.

At least in the case of normal numbers in the narrower format, the conversion to 
the wider format is much simpler: the exponent is adjusted and the mantissa bits 
are simply shifted to the left by the appropriate numbers of bits.

## Floating point arithmetic

FINISH WRITING

### Addition and subtraction

FINISH WRITING

### Multiplication and division

FINISH WRITING

### Roots and logarithms

FINISH WRITING

### Trigonometric operations

FINISH WRITING

## Floating point in Java

The Java programming language has two primitive floating point types, with 
corresponding instructions for the JVM. Java reserves `float` and `double` for 
32-bit and 64-bit floating point, respectively. These have the object wrappers 
`java.lang.Float` and `java.lang.Double`.

### Java and `strictfp`

It was mentioned earlier that when Java first came out, some of the machines 
that the Java Virtual Machine could run on were capable of 80-bit floating point 
arithmetic.

That could have meant that in some cases floating point calculations on a JVM on 
a particular device could return a result that's slightly different from a JVM 
on a different device.

Theoretically, for example, a result that vanishes to zero in 64-bit floating 
point arithmetic might be nonzero in 80-bit floating point and get rounded up to 
the smallest positive value that 64-bit floating point can represent, resulting 
in one computer using Java to give one result and another computer also running 
Java to give a slightly different result (I have not ever been able to find 
evidence of this happening).

So the reserved word `strictfp` was introduced in Java 1.2. It is a modifier 
that requires all floating point calculations to be done in 32- or 64-bit 
floating point, according to their declared data types, and not 40- or 80-bit 
floating point or any other floating point format that might be available on the 
host machine.

Indeed in the Java Development Kit (JDK) for Java 8, we find that the 
`java.lang.StrictMath` class is declared with the `strictfp` modifier, and so 
all of its static functions are also `strictfp`. But a lot of static functions 
in `java.lang.Math` call their counterparts in `java.lang.StrictMath`.

Also, many programmers only needed approximate values that their programs would 
round up to integers, so losing subnormal numbers close to zero was just not an 
issue.

From Java 17 onwards, using `strictfp` is unnecessary because all floating point 
calculations are evaluated "strictly." Writing `strictfp` is still allowed, 
because `strictfp` is still a reserved word, but the compiler gives a warning. 
In the Java 21 JDK source, "`strictfp`" is not used as a modifier nor is it even 
mentioned in the Javadoc. The `strictfp` modifier would be a historical 
curiosity except that a lot of devices are still running Java 8 and Java 11, and 
maybe some non-LTS versions prior to Java 17.

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

Commit message:

Remark about reliability of multiplication and division

Basics.md, after:

# Basics of floating point numbers

The integer primitives in Java are all fixed point numbers, the "binary point" 
happens to be to the right of the least significant bit. The leftmost bit is the 
sign bit, and each of the bits after that always correspond to the same power of 
two multiplied by 0 or 1.

With floating point numbers, the leftmost bit is still the sign bit. But some of 
the other bits are used for an exponent. The remaining bits represent a fixed 
point number which is multiplied by the power of two indicated by the exponent 
bits.

However many bits a particular floating point number format has, the leftmost 
bit is always for the sign, and there are multiple ways to apportion the other 
bits between the exponent and the mantissa.

After all these years of hardware and software using specific apportionments for 
the 32- and 64-bit formats, it is inadvisable to try to apportion the bits of 
these formats differently than what almost everyone does.

Therefore, the apportionments on the following table should be considered as 
suggestions for all formats other than 32- and 64-bit. The following table omits 
the sign bit column because it's always 1. It was decided long ago that 32-bit 
floating point is "single" precision, and the other formats are reckoned in 
relation to it. The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) has instructions for "single" and 
"double" precision floating point.

| JVM type | Term      | Total bits | Exponent bits | Mantissa bits |
|----------|-----------|-----------:|--------------:|--------------:|
| None     | Quarter   |          8 |             4 |             3 |
| None     | Half      |         16 |             5 |            10 |
| `float`  | Single    |         32 |             8 |            23 |
| `double` | Double    |         64 |            11 |            52 |
| None     | Quadruple |        128 |            15 |           112 |
| None     | Octuple   |        256 |            19 |           236 |

On Wikipedia, I saw the formula $4 \log_2(k) - 13$, but I have not been able to 
verify if that comes from some official source. The $k$ stands for the total 
number of bits. For single precision, there is one more exponent bit than the 
formula indicates. The formula doesn't quite work for half or quarter precision.

The total number of bits doesn't have to be a power of two, but that certainly 
simplifies the calculation of $\log_2 k$. For example, when Java first came out, 
some physical chips like the Intel 8087 provided 80-bit floating point numbers. 
The formula suggests an 80-bit floating point number ought to have roughly 
12.287712379549447 exponent bits, which in this case we round down to 12, or we 
might decide to round up to 13.

We could define "extended" formats thus:

| Term               | Total bits | Exponent bits | Mantissa bits |
|--------------------|-----------:|--------------:|--------------:|
| Extended quarter   |         10 |             4 |             5 |
| Extended half      |         20 |             5 |            14 |
| Extended single    |         40 |             8 |            31 |
| Extended double    |         80 |            12 |            67 |
| Extended quadruple |        160 |            16 |           143 |
| Extended octuple   |        320 |            20 |           299 |

The fact that bytes are made up of eight bits would seem to be the only reason 
why formats smaller than quarter precision haven't had much general use until 
fairly recently. And even quarter precision was largely forgotten outside the 
realm of embedded systems as 16-bit processors became common for personal 
computers. I will write more about the smallest formats later on in this 
document.

Note that the sign bit applies to the mantissa, not the exponent. Then it would 
seem that the exponent bits can't represent negative numbers. The lowest number 
that can be represented, given $w$ bits for the exponent, would seem to be 0 
(all exponent bits 0), and the greatest would seem to be $2^w - 1$.

But this would mean that the binary point can only be moved to the left, either 
leaving the mantissa unchanged or doubling it, quadrupling it, etc., but never 
halving, quartering, etc.

It certainly would be possible to have a separate sign bit for the exponent, but 
the format is complex enough as it is. So the concept of bias was introduced. 
The **bias** is a number, usually negative, that is added to the exponent. For 
example, if the bias is &minus;510, adding that to the unbiased exponent 1 gives 
the biased exponent &minus;509.

If $w$ is the number of exponent bits, then the bias seems to be chosen to be 
$-(2^{w - 1}) + 1$, so that an unbiased exponent of $2^{w - 1} - 1$ biases to 0. 
However, both unbiased exponents 0 and 1 bias to $-(2^{w - 1}) + 2$, as unbiased 
exponent 0 has a special meaning that will be explained later in this document. 
Then, from 1 to $2^{w - 1} - 2$, the biased exponent increases as one would 
expect. Unbiased exponent $2^w - 1$ also has a special meaning that will also be 
explained later. The following table shows typical biases:

| Precision |        Bias | Minimum biased | Maximum biased |
|-----------|------------:|---------------:|---------------:|
| Quarter   |    &minus;7 |       &minus;6 |              7 |
| Half      |   &minus;15 |      &minus;14 |             15 |
| Single    |  &minus;127 |     &minus;126 |            127 |
| Double    | &minus;1023 |    &minus;1022 |           1023 |
| Quadruple | PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |
| Octuple   | PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |    PLACEHOLDER |

Note that the the maximum biased exponent translated to an unbiased exponent and 
then reinterpreted as a biased exponent works out to 0. For example, in quarter 
precision, the bit pattern 0 1110 001 has an unbiased exponent of 14, which 
biases to 7.

Technically, the maximum available biased exponent is one greater than is shown 
in this table, but given the special meaning of the maximum exponent, the number 
is moot.

If all the exponent bits are on, but all the mantissa bits are off, the value 
represents positive or negative infinity, according to the sign bit. But if the 
exponent bits are all on and even just one of the mantissa bits is also on, the 
value represents the special quantity Not a Number (NaN). I will elaborate NaN 
more later on in this document.

When the exponent is not the lowest nor the highest, the mantissa bits are 
understood to contain an implied leading 1. Therefore, with typical biases, the 
number 1.0 is represented with the sign bit off, all exponent bits on except the 
highest one, and all the mantissa bits off.

| Precision | Bit pattern of 1.0 in hexadecimal |
|-----------|----------------------------------:|
| Quarter   |                                38 |
| Half      |                             3C 00 |
| Single    |                       3F 80 00 00 |
| Double    |           3F F0 00 00 00 00 00 00 |
| Quadruple |                       PLACEHOLDER |
| Octuple   |                       PLACEHOLDER |

So the most significant bit of the mantissa always represents one half, the next 
most significant bit represents one quarter, and so on and so forth.

If the mantissa bits always have an implied leading 1, there's no way to 
represent 0.0. A number is said to be **normal** or **normalized** if its 
mantissa bits have an implied leading 1. But if the unbiased exponent is 0, the 
number does not have an implied leading 1 and is therefore said to be 
**subnormal**. The biased exponent for unbiased exponent 0 is the same as for 
unbiased exponent 1.

Therefore 0.0 is represented with all bits off. But if the sign bit is on and 
all other bits are off, the number is actually &minus;0.0, which is 
arithmetically equal to 0.0.

Nonzero subnormal numbers vastly complicate floating point arithmetic, 
especially when one operand is subnormal and the other one is not. In many 
cases, adding a subnormal number to a normal number results in a loss of the 
subnormal number.

Just representing a number, without necessarily trying to do arithmetic with it, 
often involves approximation. Consider for example the representation of one 
third, that is, 1.0 divided by 3. In half precision, that is represented as 
$$\frac{1 + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{16} + \frac{1}{64} + \frac{1}{256} + 
\frac{1}{1024}}{4}.$$

The bit pattern is 35 55, with sign bit 0, exponent 13 biased to &minus;2 and 
mantissa bits 0.3331 normalized to 1.3331, to represent 0.3333. In 32-bit 
floating point, we can improve that to 0.33333334 (bit pattern 3E AA AA AB) and 
in 64-bit floating point we get 0.3333333333333333 (bit pattern 3F D5 55 55 55 
55 55 55), which should be good enough for most practical purposes.

But at least in that example, improving precision is usually a simple matter of 
repeating the bit pattern. With irrational numbers like &pi; and $\sqrt 2$, 
improving precision probably requires repeating the calculation in the larger 
format.

When a number becomes too large in absolute value after one or more arithmetic 
operations for the format to represent it with any degree of approximation, it 
should overflow to positive or negative infinity. Similarly, when a number 
becomes too small in absolute value, it should vanish to &plusmn;0.0.

## More about NaN

There are two kinds of NaN: quiet NaN (qNaN) and signaling NaN (sNaN). A quiet 
NaN should not cause any sort of exception or error. A signaling NaN is supposed 
to cause some kind of exception or error, but whether or not that actually 
happens depends on several factors, some of which are hardware-dependent.

A quiet NaN has the highest explicit mantissa bit on. A signaling NaN should 
have the highest explicit mantissa bit off and obviously at least one of the 
less significant bits on (otherwise the value is an infinity, not NaN).

Beyond this, there has never been any agreement on what the other mantissa bits 
of a NaN value should represent.

"Not a number" more precisely means "not a number that can be meaningfully 
represented in this format." It is quite distinct from numbers that could be 
represented more accurately in a floating point format with more bits.

For example, the number $i$, which the number such that $i^2 = -1$, can't be 
represented meaningfully in floating point, but it can be represented in some 
kind of struct holding two floating point values (one for the real part, the 
other for the imaginary part).

FINISH WRITING

## Formats smaller than eight bits

Five-bit floating point is the smallest possible floating point number possible 
according to the rules outlined in this document so far, including the ability 
to distinguish between quiet NaNs and signaling NaNs. One sign bit, two exponent 
bits and two mantissa bits, plus an implicit leading 1 bit for the mantissa for 
normalized numbers.

However, since hardly anyone seems to care about distinguishing between quiet 
and signaling NaNs, it's possible to do 4-bit floating point: one sign bit, two 
exponent bits and a single mantissa bit. Thanks to normalization, this format 
has two effective mantissa bits for most finite values.

The bias by the usual rules then winds up being 0, which is technically 
unbiased. Normalization becomes meaningless.

It is easy to list all possible 4-bit values in this document.

| Bit pattern | Value           |
|-------------|-----------------|
| 1 00 0      | &minus;0.0      |
| 1 00 1      | &minus;0.5      |
| 1 01 0      | &minus;1.0      |
| 1 01 1      | &minus;1.5      |
| 1 10 0      | &minus;2.0      |
| 1 10 1      | &minus;3.0      |
| 1 11 0      | &minus;Infinity |
| 1 11 1      | NaN             |
| 0 00 0      | 0.0             |
| 0 00 1      | 0.5             |
| 0 01 0      | 1.0             |
| 0 01 1      | 1.5             |
| 0 10 0      | 2.0             |
| 0 10 1      | 3.0             |
| 0 11 0      | +Infinity       |
| 0 11 1      | NaN             |

Despite the apparent simplifying effect of not having to worry about 
normalization, 4-bit floating point arithmetic still has plenty of complexity. 
For example, consider that adding 3.0 to any of the five positive values should 
overflow to positive infinity in each case, not wrap around to NaN, negative 
zero or a negative value.

FINISH WRITING

## Conversions

It is quite easy to convert integers in an integer data type using two's 
complement to a wider or narrower format, e.g., to convert from a 16-bit integer 
to a 32-bit integer or the other way around.

Converting a floating point number to a wider or narrower format is subject to 
major complexity in both directions.

### Narrowing conversions

We accept that narrowing conversions are potentially lossy in the case of both 
integer types and floating point types. But in the case of integers, a loss 
occurs only when the number is farther away from 0 than the narrower format can 
accommodate.

With floating point numbers, distance from 0 alone is not enough to determine if 
the number can be converted to the narrower format precisely. The trade-off is 
that in many cases when a loss of precision occurs, the converted number is not 
too far off from the original number.

For example, 65472.0 and 65504.0 can both be represented in half precision. But 
65488.0 can't be. To take that value from a wider format, such as single 
precision, to half precision, it is necessary to either truncate the mantissa or 
round it up to the next higher available mantissa.

When a negative exponent is lower than the narrower format can represent, the 
number simply underflows to &plusmn;0.0, and when a positive exponent is higher 
than the narrower format can represent, the number simply overlows to 
&plusmn;&infin;.

### Widening conversions

Converting an integer to a wider format is just a simple matter of copying the 
sign bit to the extra bits. This works thanks to two's complement. For example, 
to convert &minus;3 in a byte to any wider integer format, we just fill the 
extra bits with more 1s.

Converting a floating point number to a wider format is rather more complicated, 
especially if the number is subnormal but not 0.0 in the original format, as it 
would not be subnormal in the target format.

In that case, the exponent needs to be converted and the highest on bit of the 
mantissa is dropped, and the remaining mantissa bits are shifted to the left 
accordingly.

At least in the case of normal numbers in the narrower format, the conversion to 
the wider format is much simpler: the exponent is adjusted and the mantissa bits 
are simply shifted to the left by the appropriate numbers of bits.

## Floating point arithmetic

FINISH WRITING

### Addition and subtraction

FINISH WRITING

### Multiplication and division

Generally, multiplication and division are more reliable than addition and 
subtraction.

FINISH WRITING

### Roots and logarithms

FINISH WRITING

### Trigonometric operations

FINISH WRITING

## Floating point in Java

The Java programming language has two primitive floating point types, with 
corresponding instructions for the JVM. Java reserves `float` and `double` for 
32-bit and 64-bit floating point, respectively. These have the object wrappers 
`java.lang.Float` and `java.lang.Double`.

### Java and `strictfp`

It was mentioned earlier that when Java first came out, some of the machines 
that the Java Virtual Machine could run on were capable of 80-bit floating point 
arithmetic.

That could have meant that in some cases floating point calculations on a JVM on 
a particular device could return a result that's slightly different from a JVM 
on a different device.

Theoretically, for example, a result that vanishes to zero in 64-bit floating 
point arithmetic might be nonzero in 80-bit floating point and get rounded up to 
the smallest positive value that 64-bit floating point can represent, resulting 
in one computer using Java to give one result and another computer also running 
Java to give a slightly different result (I have not ever been able to find 
evidence of this happening).

So the reserved word `strictfp` was introduced in Java 1.2. It is a modifier 
that requires all floating point calculations to be done in 32- or 64-bit 
floating point, according to their declared data types, and not 40- or 80-bit 
floating point or any other floating point format that might be available on the 
host machine.

Indeed in the Java Development Kit (JDK) for Java 8, we find that the 
`java.lang.StrictMath` class is declared with the `strictfp` modifier, and so 
all of its static functions are also `strictfp`. But a lot of static functions 
in `java.lang.Math` call their counterparts in `java.lang.StrictMath`.

Also, many programmers only needed approximate values that their programs would 
round up to integers, so losing subnormal numbers close to zero was just not an 
issue.

From Java 17 onwards, using `strictfp` is unnecessary because all floating point 
calculations are evaluated "strictly." Writing `strictfp` is still allowed, 
because `strictfp` is still a reserved word, but the compiler gives a warning. 
In the Java 21 JDK source, "`strictfp`" is not used as a modifier nor is it even 
mentioned in the Javadoc. The `strictfp` modifier would be a historical 
curiosity except that a lot of devices are still running Java 8 and Java 11, and 
maybe some non-LTS versions prior to Java 17.

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING

FINISH WRITING
